Chapter 20

One day, Kṛiṣhṇa was alone with the boys and the cows. Balarāma had not accompanied them on this particular day. As they approached Lake Madu in a playful mood, the cows and the gopa boys started feeling thirsty. In an impulsive moment, they started drinking from the lake. They had completely forgotten that the lake was poisoned by a huge snake called Kāliya. At once, they fainted and fell to the ground, almost dead. Kṛiṣhṇa became furious at Kāliya for hurting his dear friends, his devotees. As the other boys watched, Kṛiṣhṇa swiftly climbed up a nearby tree and jumped into the lake. The other boys got shocked at this. They thought death was certain for their dear Kṛiṣhṇa. Most of them ran to inform Mother Yaśhodā of this unforeseen turn of events. Yaśhodā along with other Gopikās reached the lakeshore and started going around the lake trying to find Kṛiṣhṇa. All they could see was bubbles floating to the surface. Kṛiṣhṇa was deep inside the lake trying to wake up the sleeping Kāliya to challenge him to a duel. As Kṛiṣhṇa agitated the lake, Kāliya woke from his slumber. As he looked up, he saw a blue boy near the surface and several people running hither and thither on the lakeshore. Kāliya was not pleased with the nuisance. He dashed to the surface to attack Kṛiṣhṇa. As Kṛiṣhṇa dashed up to the surface, Kāliya caught him and coiled around him to crush and kill him. Kṛiṣhṇa expanded himself and just as Kāliya was losing grip, Kṛiṣhṇa jumped on to Kāliya’s hoods. Holding on to Kāliya’s tail in his left hand, Kṛiṣhṇa jumped from one hood to another performing the most beautiful dance that anyone had ever seen. Everyone at the lakeshore stood mesmerized by Kṛiṣhṇa’s dance on Kāliya. It was clear that Kāliya was about to lose consciousness. At that time, Kāliya’s wives and children appeared on the surface of the lake. They all worshipped Kṛiṣhṇa and begged him to let go of Kāliya. They promised that they would leave Lake Madu forever and go to live in the deep forest without hurting anyone. Kṛiṣhṇa gracefully agreed to their request. The boys and cows that had fainted earlier were restored back to life by Kṛiṣhṇa’s merciful gaze. All the mothers including Yaśhodā were relieved to have their dear children back in good health. They felt so relieved that they did not have to worry about dangers caused by Kāliya anymore.
