Chapter 21 
Everyone’s favorite way to pass time in Vṛndāvana was to listen to Kṛiṣhṇa play the flute. Everyone including the cows would lose themselves in the sweet music coming out of Kṛiṣhṇa’s flute. At the banks of River Yamunā, as the soft wind blew carrying the sweet smell of lotuses, Kṛiṣhṇa would put the flute to his lips and breathe into it a divine melody that would get carried in the air for miles. The calves who were in the middle of drinking their mothers’ milk would stop drinking and stare in the direction of the music as the milk that they forgot to swallow, would dribble out of the side of their mouths. The cows that sat down to chew the cud would forget to chew and with their ears fixed in the direction of the music, would sit still and soak themselves in the magical tunes. Gopikās were no exception. When they hear the music, all they would do is talk about Kṛiṣhṇa among themselves. They would discuss his several feats, his charming beauty and about how fortunate they were to always have him in their midst. The Gopikās were full of love for Kṛiṣhṇa. They had heard that the month of Mārgaśhīrṣha (मार्गशीर्ष) was the holiest of all months and the puja done to Devī Kātyāyanī (देवी कात्यायनी) would always be answered. So, they all would go to the river early in the morning and bathe in it. Then they would worship Devī Kātyāyanī wishing that Kṛiṣhṇa would look upon them with love. Everyone of them yearned equally for companionship of Kṛiṣhṇa and nothing else mattered to them. Kṛiṣhṇa promised that he would fulfil their wishes very soon.

The autumn season (Śharad Ṛtu – शरद ऋतु) had set in. The nights were filled with perfumes from the jasmines. It was a full moon night. As the moon rose in the east, it looked like a huge orange globe. The nearby forest was drenched in the moonlight. On the banks of Yamunā river, Kṛiṣhṇa picked up his flute, put it to his lips and breathed softly into it. The notes of music which came out of the flute reached the ears of every Gopikā in Vṛndāvana who were thinking of Kṛiṣhṇa alone. The music was maddening and they were drawn towards it. One Gopikā was in the middle of milking the cow, she dropped the vessel and ran. Some gopīs were boiling the milk. Without waiting to see if it boiled over, they abandoned it and ran. Some others were in the middle of other household chores. They all dropped whatever they were doing mid-way and started running towards the banks of River Yamunā without paying heed to their family members who were asking them where they were headed to.

All the gopīs swiftly reached the banks of River Yamunā and surrounded Kṛiṣhṇa who was playing the flute. Suddenly every Gopikā saw Kṛiṣhṇa next to her. They started dancing full of joy and bliss at the divine music that Kṛiṣhṇa was playing. Each Gopikā felt that she had Kṛiṣhṇa personally all for herself. Each of them danced with their Kṛiṣhṇa until they dropped. In this manner, Kṛiṣhṇa fulfilled the promise he had made to the Gopikās and gave them a memorable evening that they would cherish forever.
