Chapter 18

Vṛndāvana was a beautiful place. Its forest was lush green, the mountain Govardana majestic and the dark Yamunā (यमुना) flowing placidly around it. Life in Govardhana was bliss. Kṛiṣhṇa and Balarāma  were now old enough to accompany the older Gopālas when they went to graze the cows. Kṛiṣhṇa took a liking to play the flute. When he did, everyone was mesmerized by the melody.

One day, when Kṛiṣhṇa and Balarāma  went into the forest to graze the calves, an Asura named Vatsa (वत्स), another henchman of Kaṃsa, had taken the form of a calf and mingled with the calves of the Gopālas. Kṛiṣhṇa came to know that this wasn’t one of his calves. Quitey he walked behind the Asura, caught hold of his legs and whirled him round and round over his head. Then, with a mighty force Kṛiṣhṇa dashed the Asura to the ground. The Asura fell dead. So wild was Kṛiṣhṇa’s whirling that the Asura’s body hit the trees of the forest so many times that several hundred fruits of wood apple had fallen to the ground. The children who were there were both amazed at Kṛiṣhṇa’s feat as well as excited to get their heart’s content of wood apple fruits.

On another day, the boys went to the banks of River Yamunā. An unusually giant crane was lying near the river. It looked strange. Not in the least like a natural bird. It was huge like the mountain and studded with artificial features. When the curious boys slowly walked towards the bird, it suddenly came to life and with its beak wide open, it swallowed Kṛiṣhṇa.

Everyone was astonished. Their beloved Kṛiṣhṇa seemed to have disappeared. The crane, who was actually an Asura named Baka (बक), felt a burning ball of fire traveling down his long neck. He couldn’t bear the pain and he spit Kṛiṣhṇa out. He then rushed towards Kṛiṣhṇa armed with his long, powerful beaks intending to poke him to death. Kṛiṣhṇa caught hold of the two halves of the Asura’s beak and tore the terrible bird in two.

When the kids went back to their homes and told everyone about Kṛiṣhṇa’s daring feat, the citizens of Vṛndāvana were both astonished and thankful that Kṛiṣhṇa and Balarāma  were safe. Nanda thought to himself, “Kṛiṣhṇa is no ordinary child. He will live long and will be famed throughout the world.”

The death of Pūtanā and Baka enraged their brother - an Asura called Aghāsura (अघासुर). He rushed to the forest one day where Kṛiṣhṇa, Balarāma and the other kids of Vṛndāvana were playing. Aghāsura transformed himself into a giant python more than 8 miles long. The python was as tall as a mountain, so unless someone could get an aerial view, no one would have been able to identify this huge mass as a snake. 

Aghāsura opened his mouth and lay still. His mouth was so big that the upper jaw reached the sky while the lower jaw was firmly fixed on the ground. He positioned himself in such a way that he blended in with the mountainous surroundings. 

The Gopāla boys reached the part of the forest where Aghāsura was waiting. They saw this huge figure and said, “Look! What an amazing cavern. It even looks like the mouth of a huge snake.”

The curious boys entered the mouth of the cavern one by one, unaware that they were walking into the mouth of a live python. The calves they were grazing followed them as well into the snake’s mouth. 

Kṛiṣhṇa was watching all this. He knew the real nature of the Asura in front of him. He smiled. He knew that the time to end Aghāsura’s life had come. He walked into the enormous python’s mouth. As soon as he entered, Aghāsura firmly shut his mouth engulfing the boys in darkness.

Kṛiṣhṇa walked to the throat of the python and began to grow bigger and bigger in size. Kṛiṣhṇa’s form started hurting Asura's throat. So much so that Aghāsura tried to spit him out and save himself. But it was not happening. Aghāsura winced and screamed in pain. His tail lashed from side to side helplessly. Soon, Kṛiṣhṇa’s form had grown so much that Aghāsura’s head exploded. All the boys ran out and Kṛiṣhṇa walked behind them. When they turned around and looked, they saw a ball of light entering Kṛiṣhṇa's feet. Aghāsura, who had been killed by Bhagavān, had attained liberation by the touch of Kṛiṣhṇa’s feet.

This is yet another story that teaches us the immense power of having bhakti (भक्ति) for Kṛiṣhṇa. A Rākṣhasī who fed him poisonous milk. An Asura who tried to eat him. Devas who were cursed to be trees. Regardless of their intentions, everyone who came in Kṛiṣhṇa’s way attained mokṣha. Such is the beauty and power of Kṛiṣhṇa.

Imagine the grace we would all receive if we prayed to Kṛiṣhṇa with pure bhakti. Wouldn’t our mokṣha also be guaranteed?
