   Chapter 17

Chapter 17

Yaśhodā sees a vision
When he grew up into a young boy, Kṛiṣhṇa was especially mischievous. The Gopīs would complain about him to Yaśhodā all the time.

One Gopī complained, “Do you know what Kṛiṣhṇa did today? He untied the calf and it drank all the milk from the cow. I couldn’t get any milk for the house. When I asked him about it, Kṛiṣhṇa laughed proudly.”

Another Gopī said, “Kṛiṣhṇa is always stealing curd and butter from my house. Even my own children don’t steal them. Kṛiṣhṇa does.”

One time, a Gopī related Kṛiṣhṇa’s innovative way of stealing butter. She said, “I had tied the pot of butter to a rope and hung it from the roof so that Kṛiṣhṇa would be unable to reach it. When I wasn’t at home, Kṛiṣhṇa inspired the other boys to be his partner in crime. He made one of his friends stand on the mortar (a heavy substance used for grinding). Then Kṛiṣhṇa got up on his friend’s back and made a hole in the pot. Not only did he eat the butter, he ensured that everyone ate butter to their heart’s content. The end result was that I came back home to an empty pot with a hole in it.”

Yaśhodā would promise to discipline her child. But looking into his big beautiful teary eyes, Yaśhodā would melt and not have the heart to scold him. The Gopīs too would return to their houses mesmerized by the beautiful face of Kṛiṣhṇa. 

One day, Kṛiṣhṇa and Balarāma were playing in front of the house and Yaśhodā was inside. Suddenly Balarāma came running inside and said, “Mother! Come and see this. Kṛiṣhṇa is eating mud.”

Yaśhodā was angry. She walked out, caught hold of Kṛiṣhṇa and asked, “Why did you eat mud you mischievous boy?”

Kṛiṣhṇa pleaded, “No Mother! I did not eat any mud. I swear.”

Yaśhodā demanded that Kṛiṣhṇa open his mouth and show her. When Kṛiṣhṇa opened his mouth, Yaśhodā was awestruck. Inside the tiny mouth of Kṛiṣhṇa, Yaśhodā saw the entire universe. She saw the sky. The three worlds. Stars. The sun. The Devas. She saw oceans and mountains. Animals and plants. She saw it all. Everything that had ever been created was visible inside Kṛiṣhṇa’s mouth. 

Yaśhodā trembled in shock. She was astonished. She even saw Gokula inside Kṛiṣhṇa’s mouth. And in that Gokula, she saw a Yaśhodā - who was looking into Kṛiṣhṇa's mouth. And inside that was another Yaśhodā. And another Kṛiṣhṇa. She saw the infinity of mirrors.

Before she could realize what she had seen, Kṛiṣhṇa closed his mouth. And the Māyā of Bhagavān made her forget the whole incident.

Kṛiṣhṇa becomes Dāmodara (दामोदर)
Another day, Kṛiṣhṇa asked Yaśhodā to feed him as he was hungry, but Yaśhodā was a bit preoccupied with not allowing the milk that was on the fire to overflow. Angrily, Kṛiṣhṇa grabbed the churning rod that Yaśhodā was using to churn curd into butter and pulled at it. The pot broke and Kṛiṣhṇa grabbed as much butter as he could fit into his tiny hands and ran outside. He ate the butter to his heart’s content and even fed a monkey nearby.

When Yaśhodā returned and saw the broken pot, she knew that it was Kṛiṣhṇa’s mischief. She grabbed a stick and ran after her son, “Stop!”, she said. “Is there no end to your mischief?”

Yaśhodā finally caught up with Kṛiṣhṇa but seeing his scared face and tender arms clutching on to her in fear, Yaśhodā did not have the heart to beat her son. But she knew that she had to do something firm to discipline her son. So, she decided to tie him to the very mortar that Kṛiṣhṇa was sitting on while eating the stolen butter. 

Yaśhodā grabbed a rope and tied one end to Kṛiṣhṇa’s waist. Then, she took the other end around the mortar. But she could not knot the rope. It was slightly short. So, she grabbed another piece of rope and tied it to the first one. But when she took the extended rope to the mortar, it was again short. She took a third piece of rope and extended it. Again short. Again and again. Yaśhodā was astonished. She knew that she was witnessing the impossible. But it was happening right in front of her. Kṛiṣhṇa smiled as though allowing Yaśhodā to tie him up. And Yaśhodā was able to tie Kṛiṣhṇa to the mortar, and she went inside to continue her chores.

After a while, Kṛiṣhṇa was bored. He started crawling, pulling the heavy mortar by the rope. As he crawled, he saw two big Arjuna (अर्जुन) trees growing together like they were twins. Kṛiṣhṇa decided to go between them. He crossed the narrow path between the trees, but the mortar he was dragging could not pass as easily. But Kṛiṣhṇa kept crawling. Suddenly, a mighty noise was heard. The two giant trees had been uprooted by the mortar, dragged by Kṛiṣhṇa. They fell to the ground with a majestic thud. From each of the two trees emerged a glowing form. The two forms fell at Kṛiṣhṇa’s feet and took the blessing of Kṛiṣhṇa and vanished.

The two glowing forms that emerged from the Arjuna trees were originally the sons of Kubera (कुबेर), named Nalakubera (नलकुबेर) and Maṇigrīva (मणिग्रीव). They were young and good looking. And being the sons of Kubera - the Deva of wealth, they were naturally rich. That was a dangerous combination and they became arrogant as well over time. One day, the two sons of Kubera were intoxicated and enjoying their time with female companions on the banks of River Gaṅgā (गङ्गा). Sage Nārada (नारद) happened to pass by. The women immediately recognized the Sage and paid their respects to him. But Nalakubera and Maṇigrīva were far too drunk to notice anything. They completely ignored the Sage.

Thus, Sage Nārada cursed them saying, “You’ve lost your power of reasoning because you’re drunk with the power of wealth. You’re infected with the worst disease of all - arrogance. You’ve forgotten the good etiquette you have to follow in the presence of Sādhus (साधु). You’re sons of Kubera but you’re full of Tamas (तमस्) and irreverence. So, I curse that you will be born as a couple of trees on earth. You will remember your previous birth and have the chance to silently contemplate your actions. You will be delivered of your curse by Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa.”

Hearing the loud thud, several villagers and Yaśhodā rushed outside. They saw the two fallen trees, and Kṛiṣhṇa happily crawling nearby. They naturally assumed that the trees had fallen, but had narrowly missed Kṛiṣhṇa. Yaśhodā quickly untied Kṛiṣhṇa. A few young boys watching all this said that it was Kṛiṣhṇa who caused the trees to fall, but no one believed them. After all, how could a child bring down two mighty trees? 

There was once a fruit vendor - a woman from the Niṣhāda tribe (निषाद), who was selling Araṇyaka (आरण्यक) fruits. Kṛiṣhṇa heard the fruit vendor’s voice and rushed outside to meet her. He eagerly asked for some fruits but the lady asked for payment. Little Kṛiṣhṇa rushed into the house, filled his palms with grains from the sack and rushed outside to exchange them for the fruits he so desired. But his little palms spilled the grains all the way to the door and by the time he reached the fruit vendor, his palms were empty. The lady was moved by little Kṛiṣhṇa’s cute gesture and she happily gave him the choicest fruits from her basket. Kṛiṣhṇa excitedly ate them.

When the fruit vendor went home, she noticed that her bag was unusually heavy. She opened the bag and was astonished to find that it was filled with precious gems. She could not understand how! But we know. This was yet another of Bhagavān’s Līlā (लीला).

By now, Kṛiṣhṇa had been attacked four times. Nanda and the people of Gokula were worried for his safety. Although they did not suspect that Kṛiṣhṇa was in fact Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa, they did attribute his escapes to the good graces of Viṣhṇu. Nanda suggested that they should move to a different place to keep Kṛiṣhṇa and Balarāma safe. Everyone agreed.

Thus, the entire population of Gokula - the villagers, Nanada, Yaśhodā, Rohiṇī, Kṛiṣhṇa and Balarāma mounted several carts and travelled to Vṛndāvana (वृन्दावन), which was at the foot of Mount Govardhana (गोवर्धन). The cows went ahead in large herds protected by the Gopālas (गोपाल).
