Chapter 19

Kṛiṣhṇa was five years old when Aghāsura was killed. The Devas in Indraloka (इन्द्रलोक) rejoiced at Asuras’ deaths. Brahmā Deva (ब्रह्मा देव) was amazed at the powers of young Kṛiṣhṇa. So, he decided to play a game. 

After Aghāsura’s death, Kṛiṣhṇa and the Gopa boys sat by River Yamunā and were feasting on the lunches that their mothers had packed for them. Owing to Kṛiṣhṇa’s māyā, the boys had forgotten all about the Asura and being inside a python’s mouth. They were laughing, playing and eating. Suddenly, one of the boys looked up and noticed that none of their calves were around. The boys panicked. 

Kṛiṣhṇa reassured them, “Don’t worry! keep eating. I’ll go find the calves.”

Saying so, Kṛiṣhṇa wandered all over the hill and the caves. The calves were nowhere to be found. When he returned to the banks of Yamunā, he found the place empty. His friends had disappeared as well.

Kṛiṣhṇa thought for a moment and realized what had happened. It was Brahmā who had captured the calves and the boys with sleep and hid them in a cave.

Kṛiṣhṇa smiled to himself, Brahmā is playing a game. So can I’

Kṛiṣhṇa took many forms. He became the cowherd boys. He became the calves. He became the ropes that held the calves together. He became the clothes of the boys. He became their food. The vessels. He became everything.

And so, the army of Kṛiṣhṇa went back to Vṛndāvana into their respective homes. No one could tell the difference between their own calves and boys and Kṛiṣhṇa. Everyone behaved normally. In this fashion, an entire year passed.

Meanwhile, after capturing the calves and the boys, Brahmā Deva returned to his home in Satyaloka (सत्यलोक). But to his amazement, his doorkeepers refused to allow him to go into his own house.

“Why are you stopping me?” Brahmā commanded, “I am your master.”

The doorkeepers laughed and said, “Ha! You look like our master, but you’re not him. We know that because our master is already inside.”

Brahmā was surprised. He took a peep through the keyhole and saw, to his amazement, that someone who looked just like him was seated on his seat with the Ṛṣhis (ऋषि) and Sarasvatī (सरस्वती) around him.

Brahmā was stupefied. He went back to Vṛndāvana and saw that the host of boys he had captured were now back at their homes. The calves too. Brahmā realized the power of Nārāyaṇa and bowed to him. He asked for forgiveness and returned all the boys and the calves to their original place in the forest where he had collected them a year ago.

Kṛiṣhṇa collected the calves and went to the same spot in Yamunā. The boys were eating their lunch. They said, “Wow! You found the calves so soon? We haven't even finished our lunch yet.”

Kṛiṣhṇa, the boys and the calves returned home later that evening. And the boys told their parents the story of how Kṛiṣhṇa saved them from a mighty python. Little did anyone know that a year had passed since the incident happened.

On another occasion, Dhenukāsura (धेनुकासुर) and Pralambhāsura (प्रलम्भासुर) came in the guise of a donkey and a Gopa boy respectively. Balarāma killed both of them to protect Kṛiṣhṇa and the others.
